README.md, before:

# Syllabus: Methods in Economic History 6AAH1008
Gabriel Mesevage

## Description

The purpose of this module is to introduce history students to the study
of economic historians by exposing them to the realities of historical
data collection and interpretation. The module will cover key methods in
economic history as well as key historiographical debates that revolve
around central questions of collection, measurement, and analysis. The
course builds on classic debates in economic history to allow students
the opportunity to interrogate how historians have grappled with
questions of the economy, welfare and growth in the long term.

A link to the course github page is
[here](https://github.com/gabrielfgm/methods-in-economic-history).

## 1. The history of economic history

We open by contextualizing economic history and quantitative methods in
historical inquiry within the broader development of the discipline. We
discuss the ‘cliometric’ movement in the second half of the 20th
century, its strengths and weaknesses.

Core readings:

1.  Robert Fogel “The New Economic History. I. Its Findings and
    Methods,” *Economic History Review* (1966), 19: 3, 642–656.
    ([link](https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2593168.pdf))

2.  Naomi Lamoreaux “The Future of Economic History Must Be
    Interdisciplinary,” *The Journal of Economic History* (December
    2015), 75: 4, 1251–1257.
    ([link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022050715001679))

3.  M. Gutmann, E. Klancher Merchant, and E. Roberts ““Big data” in
    economic history,” *Journal of Economic History* (2018), 78:
    1, 268299. ([link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022050718000177))

## 2. The history of quantification

We need to start by thinking about the relationship between measurement,
statistics and chance. The study of chance is relatively new – certainly
new within mathematics. It was only over the course of the last few
centuries that ideas developed about how we might quantify and describe
chance processes that are subject to chance. We will tackle some hard
philosophical readings this week about the emergence of probability as
an object of study, and think about how this relates to quantification
in history and the social sciences.

Core reading:

1.  Ian Hacking *The Taming of Chance* (Cambridge University Press,
    August 1990)., Chapter 1 and Chapter 23
    ([link](https://github.com/gabrielfgm/methods-in-economic-history/blob/main/readings-pdf/Hacking_Taming_of_Chance_Ch1_Ch23.pdf))
2.  Theodore M. Porter “Making Things Quantitative,” *Science in
    Context* (1994), 7: 3, 389–407.
    ([link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889700001757))

## 3. Basic tools: central tendencies and dispersion

We develop basic tools here to think about how we summarize data and
communicate about it. This means working through concepts that should be
familiar (averages) and concepts that may seem less familiar (standard
deviations).

Core readings (pick 1 or two textbook treatments and the additional
reading):

1.  C. H. Feinstein and Mark Thomas *Making history count* (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 2002)., Chapter 2 (harder)
    ([link](https://github.com/gabrielfgm/methods-in-economic-history/blob/main/readings-pdf/Feinstein_Thomas_Ch2.pdf))
2.  Pat Hudson and Mina Ishizu *History by Numbers* (Bloomsbury
    Publishing, November 2016)., Chapter 4 (easier)
    ([link](https://github.com/gabrielfgm/methods-in-economic-history/blob/main/readings-pdf/Hudson_Ishizu_Ch4.pdf))
3.  Peter M. Aronow and Benjamin T. Miller *Foundations of Agnostic
    Statistics* (Cambridge University Press, January 2019)., Chapter 2
    (hardest – most concise/complete)
    ([link](https://github.com/gabrielfgm/methods-in-economic-history/blob/main/readings-pdf/Aronow_Miller_Ch2.pdf))
4.  Deirdre N. McCloskey and Stephen T. Ziliak “The standard error of
    regressions,” *Journal of Economic Literature* (1996), 34: 1,
    97–114. ([link](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2729411))

## 4. Measurement in action: selection bias

Textbook mathematics is all very straightforward but almost all actual
research has to cope with the problem of selection bias. We will work
through a case study in selection bias this week looking at the problem
of inferring historical welfare from samples of population heights – a
practice known as anthropometrics.

Core readings:

1.  Howard Bodenhorn, Timothy W. Guinnane, and Thomas A. Mroz
    “Sample-Selection Biases and the Industrialization Puzzle,” *The
    Journal of Economic History* (March 2017), 77: 1, 171–207. (this is
    the first critique)
    ([link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022050717000031))
2.  John Komlos and Brian A’Hearn “Clarifications of a puzzle,” *The
    Journal of Economic History* (2019), 79: 4, 1129–1153. (the reply)
    ([link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022050719000573))
3.  Howard Bodenhorn, Timothy W. Guinnane, and Thomas A. Mroz
    “Diagnosing Sample-Selection Bias in Historical Heights,” *The
    Journal of Economic History* (December 2019), 79: 4, 1154–1175. (the
    reply to the reply)
    ([link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S002205071900055X))

## 5. Samples and their interpretation: Measuring historical wages

This session is devoted to the debate around early modern wage rates
(Allen and Stephenson and Humphries). This debate is critical to
theories of why the industrial revolution occurred in Britain as opposed
to elsewhere, and hinges around difficult questions of measurement: what
samples of wages do we have to make statements about ‘British wage
rates’ in the early modern period? How many days did people actually
work, and were the rates for individuals or firms?

Core readings:

1.  Robert C. Allen “Why the industrial revolution was british,” *The
    Economic History Review* (2011), 64: 2, 357–384.
2.  Jane Humphries “The lure of aggregates and the pitfalls of the
    patriarchal perspective,” *The Economic History Review* (2013), 66:
    3, 693–714.
3.  Robert C. Allen “The high wage economy and the industrial
    revolution,” *The Economic History Review* (February 2015), 68: 1,
    1–22.
4.  Jane Humphries and Benjamin Schneider “Spinning the industrial
    revolution,” *The Economic History Review* (February 2019), 72: 1,
    126–155.
5.  Robert C Allen “Spinning their wheels,” *Economic History Review*
    (2020), 73: 4.

## 6. Rival models: empire and historical bond yields

Bond yields have the potential to summarize a large amount of
information about interest rate risk, political risk, default risk,
exchange rate risk, etc. and have been objects of intensive interest. We
will tackle here debates around the measurement of default risk for
sovereign vs colonial borrowers and the relative role of colonialism vs
the gold standard as categories of explanation. The key methodological
tension this week is the question of what model you bring to the same
data.

Core reading:

1.  Michael D Bordo and Hugh Rockoff “The Gold Standard as a "Good
    Housekeeping Seal of Approval"” (1996), 56: 2, 41.
2.  Niall Ferguson and Moritz Schularick “The Empire Effect,” *The
    Journal of Economic History* (June 2006), 66: 2, 283–312.
3.  Olivier Accominotti, Marc Flandreau, and Riad Rezzik “The spread of
    empire,” *The Economic History Review* (May 2011), 64: 2, 385–407.

## 7. Measuring the price level

Inter-temporal comparisons of prices only make sense if we can adjust
those prices by how much things cost. This is not straightforward and
gets harder in earlier periods where prices are more difficult to come
by. We will tackle this week the ‘standard of living debate’ about
whether the industrial revolution in Britain improved or worsened wages
and by extension living standards for the average labourer. We will go
over how the ‘optimistic’ early wage series of Lindert and Williamson
proved optimistic precisely because of poor measures of changing prices,
and how this series was revised by Feinstein in his article “Pessimism
perpetuated”.

Core reading:

1.  E. J. Hobsbawm “The standard of living during the industrial
    revolution,” *The Economic History Review* (1963), 16: 1, 119–134.
2.  Peter H. Lindert and Jeffrey G. Williamson “English workers’ living
    standards during the industrial revolution,” *The Economic History
    Review* (1983), 36: 1, 1–25.
3.  Charles H. Feinstein “Pessimism Perpetuated,” *The Journal of
    Economic History* (September 1998), 58: 3, 625–658.

## 8. Measuring GDP

GDP is one of the most frequently referenced economic measures. It is
also widely misunderstood, highly constructed, and in many instances
unreliable. We focus this week on several problems with measuring GDP,
ranging from institutional capacity to adjustments for variety and
quality.

Core reading:

1.  Morten Jerven *Poor numbers* (Ithaca, UNITED STATES: Cornell
    University Press, 2013)., Intro and Chapter 1
2.  Diane Coyle *Gdp* (Princeton, UNITED STATES: Princeton University
    Press, 2014)., Chapter 4
3.  William Nordhaus “Do Real-Output and Real-Wage Measures Capture
    Reality? The History of Lighting Suggests Not,” eds. Timothy F.
    Bresnahan and Robert J. Gordon (Chicago: University of Chicago
    Press, 1997).

## 9. Measuring historical population

Many social scientists rely on historical measures of population in
regression models or theoretical accounts of growth or political change.
This week we will tackle a recent critique of this data from Guinnane
(2023), which highlights the difficulty of relying on very approximate
data (correct only to an order of magnitude at best), which is itself
the product of a model.

Core reading:

1.  Timothy W. Guinnane “We Do Not Know the Population of Every Country
    in the World for the Past Two Thousand Years,” *The Journal of
    Economic History* (September 2023), 83: 3, 912–938.
2.  N. Nunn and N. Qian “The Potato’s Contribution to Population and
    Urbanization,” *The Quarterly Journal of Economics* (May 2011), 126:
    2, 593–650.

## 10. Measuring inequality

Measuring inequality is intrinsically quite difficult because it
requires measurements of the whole distribution of income or wealth and
not simply its average. This makes inequality measures much more
sensitive to problems of sample selection in which high or low values
are more likely to be missed. In this week we tackle debates between
Auten and Splinter on the one side, and Piketty, Saez and Zucman on the
other, as to whether 20th century inequality has increased and by how
much. As this debate reveals, even with very extensive modern income tax
data, answering questions about inequality depend crucially on what we
assume about individuals not in the data set – if they are mostly rich
or mostly poor.

Core reading:

1.  Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman “Distributional
    National Accounts,” *The Quarterly Journal of Economics* (May 2018),
    133: 2, 553–609.
2.  Gerald Auten and David Splinter “Income Inequality in the United
    States,” *Journal of Political Economy* (July 2024), 132: 7,
    2179–2227.

Commit message:

updated syllabus to include links to slides and sorted out which readigns are required for week 5

README.md, after:

# Syllabus: Methods in Economic History 6AAH1008
Gabriel Mesevage

## Description

The purpose of this module is to introduce history students to the study
of economic historians by exposing them to the realities of historical
data collection and interpretation. The module will cover key methods in
economic history as well as key historiographical debates that revolve
around central questions of collection, measurement, and analysis. The
course builds on classic debates in economic history to allow students
the opportunity to interrogate how historians have grappled with
questions of the economy, welfare and growth in the long term.

A link to the course github page is
[here](https://github.com/gabrielfgm/methods-in-economic-history).

## 1. The history of economic history

We open by contextualizing economic history and quantitative methods in
historical inquiry within the broader development of the discipline. We
discuss the ‘cliometric’ movement in the second half of the 20th
century, its strengths and weaknesses.

Core readings:

1.  Robert Fogel “The New Economic History. I. Its Findings and
    Methods,” *Economic History Review* (1966), 19: 3, 642–656.
    ([link](https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2593168.pdf))

2.  Naomi Lamoreaux “The Future of Economic History Must Be
    Interdisciplinary,” *The Journal of Economic History* (December
    2015), 75: 4, 1251–1257.
    ([link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022050715001679))

3.  M. Gutmann, E. Klancher Merchant, and E. Roberts ““Big data” in
    economic history,” *Journal of Economic History* (2018), 78:
    1, 268299. ([link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022050718000177))

Slides for this week are available
[here](https://gabrielfgm.github.io/methods-in-economic-history/01_slides.html)

## 2. The history of quantification

We need to start by thinking about the relationship between measurement,
statistics and chance. The study of chance is relatively new – certainly
new within mathematics. It was only over the course of the last few
centuries that ideas developed about how we might quantify and describe
chance processes that are subject to chance. We will tackle some hard
philosophical readings this week about the emergence of probability as
an object of study, and think about how this relates to quantification
in history and the social sciences.

Core reading:

1.  Ian Hacking *The Taming of Chance* (Cambridge University Press,
    August 1990)., Chapter 1 and Chapter 23
    ([link](https://github.com/gabrielfgm/methods-in-economic-history/blob/main/readings-pdf/Hacking_Taming_of_Chance_Ch1_Ch23.pdf))
2.  Theodore M. Porter “Making Things Quantitative,” *Science in
    Context* (1994), 7: 3, 389–407.
    ([link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269889700001757))

Slides for this week are available
[here](https://gabrielfgm.github.io/methods-in-economic-history/02_slides.html)

## 3. Basic tools: central tendencies and dispersion

We develop basic tools here to think about how we summarize data and
communicate about it. This means working through concepts that should be
familiar (averages) and concepts that may seem less familiar (standard
deviations).

Core readings (pick 1 or two textbook treatments and the additional
reading):

1.  C. H. Feinstein and Mark Thomas *Making history count* (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 2002)., Chapter 2 (harder)
    ([link](https://github.com/gabrielfgm/methods-in-economic-history/blob/main/readings-pdf/Feinstein_Thomas_Ch2.pdf))
2.  Pat Hudson and Mina Ishizu *History by Numbers* (Bloomsbury
    Publishing, November 2016)., Chapter 4 (easier)
    ([link](https://github.com/gabrielfgm/methods-in-economic-history/blob/main/readings-pdf/Hudson_Ishizu_Ch4.pdf))
3.  Peter M. Aronow and Benjamin T. Miller *Foundations of Agnostic
    Statistics* (Cambridge University Press, January 2019)., Chapter 2
    (hardest – most concise/complete)
    ([link](https://github.com/gabrielfgm/methods-in-economic-history/blob/main/readings-pdf/Aronow_Miller_Ch2.pdf))
4.  Deirdre N. McCloskey and Stephen T. Ziliak “The standard error of
    regressions,” *Journal of Economic Literature* (1996), 34: 1,
    97–114. ([link](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2729411))

Slides for this week are available
[here](https://gabrielfgm.github.io/methods-in-economic-history/03_slides.html)

## 4. Measurement in action: selection bias

Textbook mathematics is all very straightforward but almost all actual
research has to cope with the problem of selection bias. We will work
through a case study in selection bias this week looking at the problem
of inferring historical welfare from samples of population heights – a
practice known as anthropometrics.

Core readings:

1.  Howard Bodenhorn, Timothy W. Guinnane, and Thomas A. Mroz
    “Sample-Selection Biases and the Industrialization Puzzle,” *The
    Journal of Economic History* (March 2017), 77: 1, 171–207. (this is
    the first critique)
    ([link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022050717000031))
2.  John Komlos and Brian A’Hearn “Clarifications of a puzzle,” *The
    Journal of Economic History* (2019), 79: 4, 1129–1153. (the reply)
    ([link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022050719000573))
3.  Howard Bodenhorn, Timothy W. Guinnane, and Thomas A. Mroz
    “Diagnosing Sample-Selection Bias in Historical Heights,” *The
    Journal of Economic History* (December 2019), 79: 4, 1154–1175. (the
    reply to the reply)
    ([link](https://doi.org/10.1017/S002205071900055X))

Slides for this week are available
[here](https://gabrielfgm.github.io/methods-in-economic-history/04_slides.html)

## 5. Samples and their interpretation: Measuring historical wages

This session is devoted to the debate around early modern wage rates
(Allen and Stephenson and Humphries). This debate is critical to
theories of why the industrial revolution occurred in Britain as opposed
to elsewhere, and hinges around difficult questions of measurement: what
samples of wages do we have to make statements about ‘British wage
rates’ in the early modern period? How many days did people actually
work, and were the rates for individuals or firms?

Core readings:

1.  Robert C. Allen “The high wage economy and the industrial
    revolution,” *The Economic History Review* (February 2015), 68: 1,
    1–22.
    ([link](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ehr.12079))
2.  Jane Humphries and Benjamin Schneider “Spinning the industrial
    revolution,” *The Economic History Review* (February 2019), 72: 1,
    126–155.
    ([link](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ehr.12693))
3.  Robert C Allen “Spinning their wheels,” *Economic History Review*
    (2020), 73: 4.
    ([link](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ehr.12850))

Additional readings:

1.  Robert C. Allen “Why the industrial revolution was british,” *The
    Economic History Review* (2011), 64: 2, 357–384.
2.  Jane Humphries “The lure of aggregates and the pitfalls of the
    patriarchal perspective,” *The Economic History Review* (2013), 66:
    3, 693–714.

## 6. Rival models: empire and historical bond yields

Bond yields have the potential to summarize a large amount of
information about interest rate risk, political risk, default risk,
exchange rate risk, etc. and have been objects of intensive interest. We
will tackle here debates around the measurement of default risk for
sovereign vs colonial borrowers and the relative role of colonialism vs
the gold standard as categories of explanation. The key methodological
tension this week is the question of what model you bring to the same
data.

Core reading:

1.  Michael D Bordo and Hugh Rockoff “The Gold Standard as a "Good
    Housekeeping Seal of Approval"” (1996), 56: 2, 41.
2.  Niall Ferguson and Moritz Schularick “The Empire Effect,” *The
    Journal of Economic History* (June 2006), 66: 2, 283–312.
3.  Olivier Accominotti, Marc Flandreau, and Riad Rezzik “The spread of
    empire,” *The Economic History Review* (May 2011), 64: 2, 385–407.

## 7. Measuring the price level

Inter-temporal comparisons of prices only make sense if we can adjust
those prices by how much things cost. This is not straightforward and
gets harder in earlier periods where prices are more difficult to come
by. We will tackle this week the ‘standard of living debate’ about
whether the industrial revolution in Britain improved or worsened wages
and by extension living standards for the average labourer. We will go
over how the ‘optimistic’ early wage series of Lindert and Williamson
proved optimistic precisely because of poor measures of changing prices,
and how this series was revised by Feinstein in his article “Pessimism
perpetuated”.

Core reading:

1.  E. J. Hobsbawm “The standard of living during the industrial
    revolution,” *The Economic History Review* (1963), 16: 1, 119–134.
2.  Peter H. Lindert and Jeffrey G. Williamson “English workers’ living
    standards during the industrial revolution,” *The Economic History
    Review* (1983), 36: 1, 1–25.
3.  Charles H. Feinstein “Pessimism Perpetuated,” *The Journal of
    Economic History* (September 1998), 58: 3, 625–658.

## 8. Measuring GDP

GDP is one of the most frequently referenced economic measures. It is
also widely misunderstood, highly constructed, and in many instances
unreliable. We focus this week on several problems with measuring GDP,
ranging from institutional capacity to adjustments for variety and
quality.

Core reading:

1.  Morten Jerven *Poor numbers* (Ithaca, UNITED STATES: Cornell
    University Press, 2013)., Intro and Chapter 1
2.  Diane Coyle *Gdp* (Princeton, UNITED STATES: Princeton University
    Press, 2014)., Chapter 4
3.  William Nordhaus “Do Real-Output and Real-Wage Measures Capture
    Reality? The History of Lighting Suggests Not,” eds. Timothy F.
    Bresnahan and Robert J. Gordon (Chicago: University of Chicago
    Press, 1997).

## 9. Measuring historical population

Many social scientists rely on historical measures of population in
regression models or theoretical accounts of growth or political change.
This week we will tackle a recent critique of this data from Guinnane
(2023), which highlights the difficulty of relying on very approximate
data (correct only to an order of magnitude at best), which is itself
the product of a model.

Core reading:

1.  Timothy W. Guinnane “We Do Not Know the Population of Every Country
    in the World for the Past Two Thousand Years,” *The Journal of
    Economic History* (September 2023), 83: 3, 912–938.
2.  N. Nunn and N. Qian “The Potato’s Contribution to Population and
    Urbanization,” *The Quarterly Journal of Economics* (May 2011), 126:
    2, 593–650.

## 10. Measuring inequality

Measuring inequality is intrinsically quite difficult because it
requires measurements of the whole distribution of income or wealth and
not simply its average. This makes inequality measures much more
sensitive to problems of sample selection in which high or low values
are more likely to be missed. In this week we tackle debates between
Auten and Splinter on the one side, and Piketty, Saez and Zucman on the
other, as to whether 20th century inequality has increased and by how
much. As this debate reveals, even with very extensive modern income tax
data, answering questions about inequality depend crucially on what we
assume about individuals not in the data set – if they are mostly rich
or mostly poor.

Core reading:

1.  Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman “Distributional
    National Accounts,” *The Quarterly Journal of Economics* (May 2018),
    133: 2, 553–609.
2.  Gerald Auten and David Splinter “Income Inequality in the United
    States,” *Journal of Political Economy* (July 2024), 132: 7,
    2179–2227.
